== Executive Summary

This is a sample application to demonstrate how to create
user-extendable models in a Ruby on Rails web application.

== Motivation

Suppose you are developing a Ruby-on-Rails web application in which
you have a model called *Ticket* with standard fields like title,
description etc. You plan to deploy that application to multiple
client sites.

However, your clients each have different requirements for what data
they want to store within the *Ticket* record. One client may want to
store priority and reported_by while another instead wants to store
urgency and turnaround time with each ticket record. As a developer,
you don't want to add a database column to *tickets* table every time
some client comes up with a new requirement. This application presents
a flexible and scaleable solution to this problem.

== Install and Run

This sample application is built using Rails 4.2 and Ruby
2.0. However, the technique is pretty generic and should work with
minimal changes for older versions too.

1. download the application from Github and unzip
2. cd elastickets
3. rake db:create db:schema:load db:seed
4. rails server

The application has two interfaces. An external interface - accessible
to a wide audience who can view, edit and add +Ticket+
records. Another admin interface, which should be accessible to few
privileged users in the client's organization who can define what set
of data can be stored with +Ticket+ records.

http://localhost:3000 is the external user interface. Clicking
"Settings" on top left takes you to the admin interface
http://localhost:3000/admin.

Note that to keep the code simple to understand, authentication logic
is not added to either external or admin section. In your real
application you should add authentication and authorize only correct
users to access either of the sections
({Device}[https://github.com/plataformatec/devise] works great).

To add a new extended column to +Ticket+:

5. go to http://localhost:3000/admin
6. click "New Extension"
7. fill the form as follows:
   Model: "Ticket"
   Position: 1
   Label: Priority
   Attr name: priority
   Attr type: select
   Values: low, medium, high
   Default: medium
   Is Required: check
8. Click "Save"

Then try to create a new ticket:

9. Go to http://localhost:3000
10. Click "NEW TICKET". You should see *Priority* as a field added at the end of the form.
11. Fill the form and save the ticket. Click to open the ticket and edit again. Go nuts!

== Explanation and guide to reading the code

First you will need to create a model called +Extension+. This model
defines every new column that a client may want to add to a regular
model in the project.

See +db/schema.rb+ for the table design for extensions and associated
routes, controller and views. You would probably want to copy over the
+Extension+ model, +extension_utilities.rb+, +extension_validator.rb+,
route definition and controller verbatim and views files with
appropriate style changes.

For every model which you want to make extendable, first add a text
column *extended_attrs* to them. Then, add these following lines to
the model class:

class Customer < ActiveRecord::Base
  serialize :extended_attrs, Hash
  validates_with ExtensionValidator
  include ExtensionUtilities
end

The controller needs just a small change to allow extended_attrs in
the params hash. The view and form code to display and edit extended
columns in Customer and straightforward and are available in
+app/controller+ and +app/views+ respectively.

Also look at tests to get an idea of how extensions can be used.

A word of caution: do not write business logic using extended
fields. Instead add proper database columns. These extended columns
should be defined by the client (and not the developers) and used only
for storing data and displaying them.

== Future plan

This application can be easily extended to support multi-tenant
databases using an additional scope column in extensions table.

Also, eventually this should be wrapped within a plugin to make it
easy to use.

== Author

This idea is extracted from application
{Slotfix}[http://slotfix.in]. The sample application was built by Amit
K Mathur. Direct your questions and comments to akmathur@gmail.com
